The boy track coach said, you show Coach Thomas how to go up that wall.
I didn't even know what he was talking about.
He gave the guy two broomstick handles about that long, about a foot long.
And they had this thing going up the top of this gym.
You know how a basketball gym is.
and they had these holes in the wall about a foot apart.
So he takes his stick and walks up just stiff, just boom, boom, boom, boom, boom, all the way up to the top, comes back down.
I was flabbergasted, because I mean, that took strength, and he was just like a statue doing it, you know.
Just like that, I mean.
So I knew he'd be a great track man.
I said, well, I want to give you a full scholarship, and I'm going to try to teach you to throw the javelin, and you can be a sprinter, run the 100-yard dash, run on the relay team,
and throw the javelin.
I said, with your arm, if you stand there and throw a football 100 yards, you'll make a javelin throw.
That's what I did.
He threw the javelin too.
Anyway, he ended up being the first black to score football at Texas A&M.
That's what I was going to tell you, the reason I was after his sophomore year.
Gene Stallings finds out or hears that he was a good football player.
And he asked me, I said, yeah.
I said, what they told me.
I said, all I know is what they told me.
They said, you can't throw a ball if he can't catch.
And he can stand still and throw one for 80 yards.
You know, I said, he's just a great athlete.
So anyway, they get him out and he goes down to LSU and wins LSU games.
Now, were you, was track the first athletic program to have black athletes?
Yes, uh-huh.
Yeah, there wasn't a single black kid when I brought them in.
Everybody?
The reason I know that for sure, I went back and looked at my school catalog to be sure, and this was the head of Shelby Metcalfe and them bringing in some black.
And everybody was positive.
Nobody was negative.
Right.
All right, let's go then to academics for all of the track.
When you first got here, did anybody give you any advice about academics here and how to deal with?
Yeah, well, not really.
Everybody knew that it was tough.
And, I mean, when you recruited, I mean, everybody knew that A&M was a top academic school, primarily in engineering and things like that.
I mean, they were ranked.
And everybody, we all knew how hard it was.
Yeah, that was real good.
But the first thing you did, see, you'd check like a boy was running a hundred and nine-five.
You wouldn't call the coach, you'd call the business office or the library deal.
and get his grades.
And then if he had the grade, then you'd call the coach and make an appointment like that.
And when they got here, what kinds of courses did y'all have them take, particularly the first year?
Well, they just took the courses.
See, that's what I didn't know about A&M.
Because when I was at Texas, just like myself, my freshman year, I took a Bible course.
And for the first two or three years, every athlete at Texas University would take Bible.
Well, those Bible classes, you'd make an A or B, and you didn't have to study.
You'd just go in and, you know.
But I come to A&M, I was wondering, well, you know, because especially freshmen, you want to give them one or two classes because they had to pass nine hours to be eligible.
But A&M, there wasn't no such a thing as no easy classes.
I mean, if they want to take Bible over there, they could flunk that Bible.
So I found that out real fast.
We didn't have a single class.
I did not have a single class to put all these years that I've coached.
No easy classes.
I mean, every freshman had to come in here and take English and history and whatever.
All right, let me tell you this.
This is bad.
It's good and it's bad.
Randy Matten said, he's throwing a shot put.
He sets the world record.
And I'm out trying to recruit.
All right.
I get a phone call from what country?
over in Europe.
This guy says, I'm so-and-so.
He said, this is Texas A&M University, Randy Madison School?
I said, yes.
And he said, you're the track coach?
He said, my name is so-and-so.
He said, I'm six foot and five.
I weigh 275 pounds.
I'll throw the shot put or whatever he said, like 12 pounds.
High school, like
70 foot, you know.
I mean, better than anybody that's ever thrown in the world.
Boy, I fell out of my chair.
He said, I want, I'm interested in coming to Texas A&M.
So I called him back and forth, and I think I'd get Randy to write him a letter or something.
So he decided to come to Texas A&M.
He comes and it's late in the year.
Washington and Southern Cal, Kansas, everybody wants this guy that knows about him.
You know, I mean, he knows Randy Mattson coming up.
And that's the reason he's coming to A&M.
Because I told him about our weight program and, you know, and all this and that.
And Randy would come out and help him, teach him some things.
All right, I sign him.
All right, get the transcript.
He comes in down here.
I get the transcript carried over there, and he didn't have Algebra II, and A&M's an engineering school.
And they said, Coach, we can't accept him.
I said, why?
He doesn't have Algebra II.
I said, well, I knew he didn't have Algebra II, but him being from Europe, you know, and he's a world record holder, this and that, no problem, can't accept him.
So I had to tell him he couldn't go.
You know where he goes?
He leaves here and goes straight to Washington.
I believe it's Washington State.
Who wins the shot put the next three, four years?
That guy.
And he didn't come to here.
He didn't want, and I told him, I said, he don't want to take, and this was the old registrar.
This was the head registrar, old guy over there.
Mr. Heaton?
Yeah.
I said, he don't want to take engineering, you know.
It doesn't matter.
We got the school rules.
All right, let me tell you another deal on the grade.
I had a guy named Ilhan Belgutti.
Now, that was the first big recruit I did.
Ilhan Belgutti.
Ilhan was from Turkey.
Not Turkey, Texas, but Turkey.
All right, I get his, I mean, he tells me what all he, he's sort of like a straight-A student, smart, and runs like a deer.
So I fly, well, we don't fly him in because we can't, you know, I tell him, you get here, we give you full scholarship.
Well, you have to get here.
But he gets here.
bring a transcript and everything.
I'd take it over at the Rector.
I mean, this is just the last day to Rector.
And I didn't get all that mail back and forth from Turkey.
But he brings the transcript, brings all this stuff to him.
and leave him.
I come back, about an hour later, the phone rings.
Coach Thomas says, this is so-and-so.
He said, we can't let that guy in school.
He's from Turkey.
I said, why?
He said, we can't even read the transcript.
I said, we can't read all that Turkish.
We don't know what it says.
I said, we cannot let him in.
I said, okay.
I picked up the phone and I called Dr. Earl Rudder.
I tell him the story.
He said, I'll call you back in about an hour.
About an hour later, the phone rang.
He had registered.
Attorney, he said, we decided, he said, Earl Rudder called me.
He said, we decided to let him in school, but we're not going to let him be eligible.
He said, you can go ahead and give him a scholarship.
We'll admit him.
And he said, nobody here can read that transcript.
We don't even know what he wants to take.
But he said, we're going to let him in, let him take anything he wants to.
And if he passes nine hours, he can compete.
But he said he can't compete.
We let him in.
You know what he makes the first grade?
I mean, he makes straight A's.
And he wants to be some kind of sort of like a doctor.
Makes straight A's.
All right, almost lose him.
See, if he hadn't come from Turkey,
I would have lost him, but this other guy, you know, would have lost him on the count of grades.
And they couldn't find anybody to read the transcript.
Describe Earl Rudder and your relationship with Mr. President Rudder.
Well, that's how I got to meet President Rudder.
And the first time I met him was when I was, let's see, there were two guys.
when I was recruiting Willie Blackman.
All right, that was my second black group.
Willie Blackman was, I forget which school he's from, but he was sort of like an academic excellence guy.
I mean, he was straight A and being a state champion and a great track guy.
I mean, it was Harvard and Stanford.
Harvard and Stanford and one or two of those other high military
not military, but high academic schools, recruiting him.
It had a good track program, and I was recruiting him.
But later on, he told me, he said, well, Coach, I think I'm going to go to Stanford.
I said, why?
He said, well, I'm going to major.
What I'm going to take, he said, A&M don't even have a class.
They don't even have two classes that I can take.
He said, I might go to Rice.
He said, the president of Rice is
trying to get me to sign with them.
And they got those two classes at Rice.
I said, I'm probably going to go to Rice.
So I tell Earl Rudder that.
And anyway, I carry him up to visit, and Earl Rudder showed him around and everything.
And after he leaves, Earl Rudder called me.
He said, Charlie, let me tell you what I told that guy, the black one.
He said, I want black one.
He said, we got to get black.
He said, I told Willie, he said, we'll make a new degree program.
If you come to Texas A&M, you'll get a degree that no other school offers.
It'll be a different name.
And he said, all I got to do is just add another class or two and add whatever, add another class or two.
And he said, Willie graduate.
He'll get that new degree.
And that kind of hit me sell Willie.
But I recruited Willie so long.
And I'd take the whole family.
I'd go down there and take the whole family.
Sometimes it'd be 10 or 20 of them.
And where was he?
We'd take them out to eat.
Where was he from?
Houston.
In Houston?
Uh-huh.
And I'd take him out right by the Astrodome.
There was a real famous restaurant right there by the Astrodome.
And he lived on the other side of the Astrodome real close.
But I bet I've taken him out 15 or 20 times.
I mean, the bill, you know, $150, $200, nothing for supper, you know.
But that was standard, you know.
And you'd want the mother and daddies to go, sisters and brothers, because you get them all recruiting the whole family, see.
The whole family falls in.
I presume that the mother was probably the most important.
Yeah, right, uh-huh.
Right.
But anyway, I finally signed him.
And President Rutter was responsible.
And Willie turned out to be a good student.
Yes, uh-huh.
And he's a lawyer right now.
Not a lawyer, but a judge.
He's a judge in Houston.
And the other, really I'm thinking about this, I get a phone call.
This was after that, after that.
No, this was before that.
phone call, President Earl Rudder, boy, it scared me to death when I get a call from you know, you know what's going on.
President said, this is Earl, Charlie, he said, he said, if you got any scholarships, he said, you may not even have to give this guy a scholarship, but he said, down there in the valley, he said, this Latin guy down there, this Mexican guy down there, he said, he's a great student, he said, he's a half miler and a miler, he said, I think he's going to win state.
He said, we really want him to come to A&M.
and I didn't know why.
I thought they knew each other, kinfolk.
It didn't even dawn on me that he was Latin, so I go down there and visit with him, and boy, he's about 6'1", 6'2", nice-looking kid, you know, straight-A student, I mean, smart, so he'd go to state and win class B or something.
It was a small town.
I've been through that town going fishing to
When you go to Del Rio, you go to San Antonio, you take a ride.
He lived way back down in there.
But Earl Rudder, I didn't even know about the guys.
And how Earl knew about this guy, he must have come down here in the academic or something.
But he wanted me to recruit him.
Of course, I mean, it didn't dawn on me that no way in the world would I offer him a high scholarship.
I mean, when Earl Rudder said, go see this guy, I mean, that's a full four-year scholarship right there.
I didn't care whether he could run a hundred or a half mile in five minutes or not, you know.
After Mr. Rudder's death, Jack Williams became president.
What was it like to work with him?
He was real good.
I never did get personally with him, you know, but a lot of time would take, you're a good athlete, you'd take them by and visit with the president a lot of times, like Randy Mattson and some of those guys.
Let's talk about recruiting Randy.
Tell me that whole story.
Well, that was a long process.
I recruited him for a year before, well, about two years, about a year and a half.
And I had club, Aggie club, writing him letters.
And like some, I get one from Germany, and I'd tell the president, I mean, this was easy at A&M.
You get to pick up the book, and you got all that stuff written down.
And all Aggies are true Aggies, and they all want to help you any way they can.
So that was one of my habits.
Every year, all these years at A&M, I'd call the president of A&M club, and the number two deal, call the women's.
The mother's club, and that was a big deal.
I found that out, and that helped a whole lot.
But anyway, I would get them, I'd say, I need you to get as many as your people, and I'd mammograph a list of things, what they did and this and that, so they would know a little person about them.
I'd send the president of these clubs that, and then he'd pass it out to the members, and then they'd write letters.
But I'd have it spaced out for, you know, every week he'd get a few letters from here and maybe some from Scotland and some from New York and different deals.
And that kind of helped, you know.
When did you first go visit Randy?
When did you get serious?
Well, first time I went to visit him was out there in,
not Lubbock but Pamper
I had a rent car.
All right, I went out to drive him around, and the first thing I said to him when I met him and got in the car, we started driving.
I said, Randy, if you come to Texas A&M, A&M will not buy you a car.
That's the first thing I said because, I mean, that was a lot of that stuff going on in those days.
I mean, if you were real good, somebody's going to buy your car.
I said, A&M will not buy you a car.
I said, we will not do anything illegal, Randy.
I said, we'll do everything.
I said, as far as spending money on you, we'll send you anywhere you want to go.
If you want to go to New York, and we did that several times, but he got to be so good that he'd turn down trips.
People would be begging him to go.
to New York indoor meet.
No, I had to miss three or four days of practice.
And he would miss meets.
In fact, we went to New York to the indoor big track meet one time.
And Friday night or Saturday night, we'd go back and Brandon said, I want you to get me a weight workout Sunday morning before the plane goes in the weight gym.
And I had to find a gym with weight for him to work out because he didn't want to miss a day.
of working out on the weights.
That's how dedicated he was.
And he turned down trips on top of trips.
I mean, trips to Germany, trips to New York, and anybody else would have given a million dollars if they had it, just to go to a truck meet like that.
But Randy would turn it down, because he didn't want to miss the practice.
Right.
Now, when you went out there, you met his family.
What was your first impression of them and Randy's interest in A&M?
They were just regular, common-type, honest-type people.
And I didn't know before they, when I first went out there, whether I had much of a chance to get them or not, because he told me to start with that it was five schools that he was going to visit,
and he was going to pick one of those five, and of course it was A&M and Texas.
And Kansas.
And Southern Cal.
And the fifth one was, I don't think it was Oklahoma.
They used to know.
It was five schools, and Southern Cal was the one I was scared of.
It wasn't better.
It was Texas, but anyway.
Right, and he visited here about last, didn't he?
Yeah, I think so.
He visited here during that Southwest Conference break because we were in Arkansas, I told you about that.
And he'd already been to Southern Cal the previous week.
Yeah, I think so, uh-huh.
Yeah, it was getting down tight and everything.
Right, when he came to visit, before he got here, did you think we had a good chance?
Well, I thought we did, but those kind of deals you just don't know for sure.
Did you ask John Lindsey and Jack Knox to help you with him?
Well, yeah, but the way they got, it was, was it Shelby or Bobby Rogers coaching then?
Shelby.
Sorry, it was Shelby.
I got Shelby to help me recruit him.
and Shelby lined up the Houston people.
Shelby got Dr. Knox, and Dr. Knox had helped me recruit before, you know, and I mean, he never missed a basketball game, see.
So when Randy said he might play basketball some, that's when Shelby, boy, Shelby got fired up over, see.
So we both recruited him.
When former students or other A&M people helped you recruit, what did you tell them about things not to do?
Well, guys like Randy out there don't, don't smoke and don't, don't offer them a drink or something, because a lot of guys, you'd buy them a cocktail or something, you know, they thought that was a big deal, but.
But you also must have had some other guidelines, don't offer money, don't own a car.
Yeah, right.
What were all those?
Well, that was the main thing.
Don't promise them any money or a car or anything like that.
Sometimes you're afraid that'll hurt you too, you know.
But, I mean, you can tell sometimes.
But Randy, I mean, he was so straight laced.
You just knew you had, I knew I had a better chance telling him that we wasn't going to buy him a car.
See, when I was being recruited, I turned down three or four cars.
And I went to the University of Texas and I didn't get a penny.
But later on, the lady that took me to Texas, after my freshman year, I got married, end of my freshman year and I got married, I called her and told her I needed
I needed something, and she sent me $150.
But boy, I didn't tell anybody.
That really wasn't illegal.
But today it would be.
But today it would be, oh yeah.
All right, this is an editorial note to the typist.
On the Saturday that Randy Mattson came to visit A&M with the track team at the conference meeting in Fayetteville,
He was brought up here by two splendid former students, John Lindsay and Dr. Jack Knox, both from Houston.
According to Randy's recollection, as they were headed up here, instead of taking Highway 6 out to Hempstead, they came up to Conroe and were planning to come on Highway 105, and they got lost.
So when they finally got here, Randy said he wanted to meet some faculty, some teachers.
And John Lindsay told him, well, that that year, for the first year, didn't have Saturday classes anymore.
But he thought there would be some folks over in Nagel Hall that taught history.
And so they came over there and I and two or three others were in the office of Professor Garland Bayless.
And so we got to meet Randy and Donny Ayers, A-Y-R-E-S or E-R?
E-R-S, I think.
A-Y-E-R-S, who was Randy's
good friend and eventually.
See, that was another recruiting deal to help get Randy.
I mean, it didn't hurt, but I think I gave him books and tuition to throw the javelin.
And he made a good javelin thrower.
Well, as we were chatting with them, I knew who Randy was because I was a real track fan.
Uh-huh.
I looked at Coach Metcalf
and winked at him where Randy couldn't see me.
And then I turned and asked if Randy was aware of the new rule about chapel.
And I didn't know that he was a churchgoer and all that when I made this up.
And he said, no, what is it?
And I said, well, the faculty voted this week that all freshman athletes have compulsory chapel at seven o'clock on Wednesday morning.
Mouth dropped open pretty wide.
But he relaxed a little when Randy said, sir, if that's a rule, I'll go.
Later, Shelby told me he wasn't going to bring any more athletes to visit.
You flew back then from the conference meet to talk to Randy.
Describe what went on from then on that weekend.
Well, we just talked.
And the same thing, he wanted to meet some, he wanted to go to classes.
We had to go up and go into some buildings, and like I said, it was on a Sunday, I think.
And I can't remember where we met any professors or not, but I remember trying to show him some buildings where he would go to class.
Were you aware that Randy was a good student?
Yes, uh-huh.
What did you try to tell him or show him about the program here?
Well, I just told him it was high caliber and everybody kind of knew that, you know.
I just told him it was tough.
You had to study.
You had to make your grades.
Do you remember what he said his major was going to be?
What did he say he wanted to study?
I believe it was business, but I'm not.
Well, that's what he ended up doing.
Yeah.
I just don't remember it now.
When he left to go back home, how did you feel about our chances?
That kind of crossed my finger, just kind of 50-50, really.
And how did he let you know?
When did he let you know?
I can't remember for sure.
One thing, he told me that he was going to sign, after he told me he was going to sign as A&M, but it was going to be on a certain date, like a week away.
And the reason he put it off a week, he had to call every coach.
the other four coaches personally and tell them that he was not coming to their school.
And I forget whether I called several times to find out exactly when that was, but I remember going out there and signing him.
Did he ever tell you what it was that attracted him to A&M?
No.
We never did talk about it much.
All right, then when he came, describe him?
Well, he came in with Donnie Ayers and we gave him a room in Henderson Hall because that was a good, that was air-conditioned, nice, but wasn't anybody in Henderson Hall but football players and basketball.
So Shelby said we'll give him a room, all right.
And I told him that we had a little conflict there.
See, I told him that he could room with Donnie Eyre.
They'd be teammates.
And I didn't know they were going to move in the basketball room.
I was going to get them a room somewhere else where the track team stayed.
Well, anyway, I don't know for sure, but they started moving into Kane Hall.
And they get in there, and then they say that Donnie Harris cannot live in there because he's not on the basketball scholarship.
I forget what all happened, but anyway, we had to get him a room up in the law hall, wasn't it?
Right across from... In Hart Hall, wasn't it?
In Hart Hall, yeah.
So I get him a room in the fourth floor, and we had to pull up stuff with the ropes to get the bed.
We took the bed and cane.
So we had, we got that bed and put it in the, up there on, in his room, but we had to pull it up by rope.
We couldn't get it through the door.
As you started Randy's workouts, what was your first impression of him as a shot putter?
Oh, he was a hard worker.
And in fact, every Monday,
My standard deal every Monday for everybody on the team would meet out at the mule barn, right across the track.
We call it the mule barn, the horse barn.
And I would run the whole team at like 5, 15.
Monday was lab day, and everybody had to take late classes.
Everybody got out of classes late on Monday.
I made everybody take viewing chemistry or biology, whatever,
All your labs had to be on Monday because they were five, for some reason they didn't get out of the lab until five o'clock.
So at five, about 5.15 I'd have everybody to meet on a Monday down there by the Mew Barn and I had a time trial.
I mean just with everybody on the track team, shot putters and distance men would run a race around the
And I'd tell them, you know, to start with, I said, you walk a while and jog a while and walk a while until you build up.
I said, we're going to do this for three or four months now until after cross-country is over.
And this was the beginning of school, see.
So we did that every Monday.
And buying holes, Randy Mattson, he would almost win the whole shooting match in three miles.
And ours was the same way.
They were both competitors.
And there was a javelin thrower and a shot footer beating all my sprinters.
I mean, it wasn't a sprinter or a quarter mile.
It could stay close to Randy Mattson.
And then, see, they told me, well, he ran a 10, 2, or 3.
They entered him in a track meet one time.
And he won a 220.
And I think he got second in a 100-yard dash.
I mean he plays high in a big track and then certain times I'd make him run up and down stadiums out there and he'd sprint up and down that stadium like nothing flat.
I mean just beat everybody.
He was really, that's when I knew that in the pro football people started trying to get him to sign pro football and I knew he'd make a great football player because he was a great basketball player and he was fast and quick and
And strong, you know, really coordinated.
When did you begin to realize what a fine human being he was?
Well, about where before I signed him.
So you had an idea of the quality you were getting.
Right, uh-huh.
It just kind of rubbed off on you, you know.
You just knew he was great.